# Introduction

ChatGPT is a Microsoft-owned tool that uses artificial intelligence (AI)
to respond to text-based messages. It's an extremely powerful tool with
a variety of professional and recreational uses. Most importantly for
technical communicators, it can be used to improve workflow and quality
of work.

Many writers, not just technical writers, are concerned about AI
potentially replacing them in the workplace. While this is possible at
some point in the future, today is not that day. Your job is safe for
now. However, in the technical communication industry, it's important to
leverage all the tools at your disposal to deliver the best possible
work. Bonus points if you can improve your workflow and deliver work
more quickly.

There are suddenly many different AI-based content generators on the
market which do similar things to ChatGPT. Some are tailored for
specific needs and types of content. In this document we will explore
ways ChatGPT can be used by professional technical writers.

# Getting started

To start using ChatGPT as a technical writing tool you will need to
create an account on the ChatGPT webpage.

1.  Browse to <https://chat.openai.com>.

2.  Select **Sign up**.

3.  Enter your **Email address** and select **Continue**.

4.  Enter a **Password** and select **Continue**.

5.  Open your email inbox and look for a message from OpenAI. Open the
    message and select **Verify email address**.

> Note: If you verify the email on a separate device or in a separate
> browser, you will need to refresh the ChatGPT window.

6.  Enter your **Name** and **Birthday**, and select **Continue**.

7.  Enter your **Phone number** and select **Send code**. You will
    receive a text message with the verification code. Enter the code
    and select **Continue**.

8.  You now have a ChatGPT account and can begin entering prompts to
    strategically generate content from the tool's responses.
    
    ![ChatGPT Signup Process](./test.gif)

# Using ChatGPT to generate content

For our purposes of describing the ways ChatGPT can be used as a
technical writing tool, our example topic will be *How to Make an
Omelet*. Let's assume that we as the writer have never made an omelet
before. We don't know what ingredients or tools we will need, and we're
not sure what the procedure will look like.

## Research

Start by asking the tool -- *What is an omelet?*

(Image? -- What is an omelet)

> Note: Depending on the question, and the chat history, you may get a
> different response than your colleague.

Based on the first response, probe further -- *What ingredients and
tools will I need?*

(Image? -- What ingredients and tools)

In the image above, the tool provides instructions as well. But what if
your document is more specifically for making an omelet over a campfire?

Get more specific -- *How do I make an omelet over a campfire with a
cast iron skillet?*

(Image? -- Campfire omelet instructions)

The more specific and tailored your prompt is, the more specific and
applicable the tool's response will be. This is the true power of
ChatGPT. There are hundreds of different omelet recipes on the internet
already, but I doubt there are very many campfire omelet recipes out
there. This same method can be applied to more complex and specific
topics to aid in the research process.

## Outlining

The research process will help you learn more about your topic. Now you
need to determine the best way to transfer that knowledge to your
audience. This part of the process provides us as technical writers with
a bit of job security, at least for now.

You cannot rely on the tool to analyze your audience for you. ChatGPT
and tools like it will generate as much content as you want, but not all
of it will be relevant or even correct.

(Image? -- What else)

Think about what your audience might want to know from a jobs-to-be-done
perspective. Procedural tips for cooking the omelet may be helpful. What
about the campfire?

(Image? -- Campfire tips)

It's up to you as the technical writer to curate the information so that
your audience has everything they need and want, but they're not
distracted by irrelevant information.

## Generating copy

Through the research and outlining processes, you will likely have
amassed plenty of copy to work with. If more is needed, get more
specific with your prompts. As you continue submitting prompts on the
same chat thread, the tool will have more context to generate the
responses you're looking for. Use the thumbs-up and thumbs-down icons in
the top right corner of each response to indicate to the tool if the
response was helpful or not.

Clearly ChatGPT is capable of generating content much faster than any
technical writer can. However, the tool isn't actually thinking about
the answer and generating an original response. It's pulling data from
things previously written by other people. Using verbatim any content
generated by ChatGPT puts the writer at risk of plagiarism.

In addition to the risk of plagiarism, in many cases the content
generated by ChatGPT can be incorrect. At this point it should be used
as a helpful nudge in the right direction, not as an ultimate source of
truth. Be sure to thoroughly vet all information when using ChatGPT to
build out sections of content.

# Give it a try (conclusion)

The best way to learn more about ChatGPT is to log in and start using
it. Ask it about itself and it will tell you everything you want to
know. Try researching a topic that's interesting to you and use your
findings to write something useful to you or your peers. Use the
strategies above to probe and develop your ideas into a cohesive
deliverable.
